# The NCN Format

The NCN format is a proprietary format used by Nick Karaoke. It is a container format that contains the lyrics, subtitles, and audio files.[^ncn_location]


[^ncn_location]: NCN files are (usually) only found in Thai karaoke discs. They are usually played using the Nick Karaoke player. The format is not documented, but it is simple enough to reverse engineer. Most other karaoke players use either CDG or KAR files instead.


There are the following files in an NCN file:

- `*.mid` - MIDI instrumental data
- `*.cur` - Timing data for the lyrics
- `*.lyr` - Lyrics data in plain text

## MIDI (`.mid`)

The MIDI file is a standard GM MIDI file. It contains the instrumental data for the song. You can use any MIDI player to play the MIDI file, or you can use a DAW to edit the MIDI file.

## Lyrics (`.lyr`)

The lyrics file is a plain text file that contains the lyrics for the song. There is no standard encoding for the lyrics file, but it is usually encoded in either TIS-620[^tis] or UTF-8. The lyrics file is usually encoded in TIS-620, but it is possible to find some songs encoded in UTF-8.

[^tis]: TIS-620, also known as Windows-874, is a Thai character encoding. It is the default encoding for Windows 95 and Windows 98.

Below is an example of a lyrics file:

```
Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star
Jane Taylor
C

Twinkle, twinkle, little star,
How I wonder what you are.
Up above the world so high,
Like a diamond in the sky.
Twinkle, twinkle, little star,
How I wonder what you are.
```

The format of the lyrics file is as follows:
```
[Song Title]
[Artist]
[Key]

[Lyrics]
```

The first 3 lines contain the song metadata. Line 1 is the song title, line 2 is the artist, and line 3 is the key of the song.

The key data is used to transpose the MIDI, and the lyrics should be separated by a newline after the metadata section.

## Cursor file (`.cur`)

The CUR file is a proprietary format used by Nick Karaoke. It contains the timing data for the lyrics. It is a binary file that is not human-readable.

Unfortunately, the Nick Karaoke website has been down for a long time, so the only proper documentation for the CUR format no longer exists. However, someone has managed to document the format in a blog post, and even managed to write a parser in Visual Basic 6 (Thai only) [here](https://sukoom2001.wordpress.com/2005/02/15/%E0%B8%A3%E0%B8%B9%E0%B8%9B%E0%B9%81%E0%B8%9A%E0%B8%9A%E0%B9%84%E0%B8%9F%E0%B8%A5%E0%B9%8C-cur-%E0%B8%82%E0%B8%AD%E0%B8%87-nick-karaoke/)

The CUR format is a sequence of MIDI time steps stored in words (2 bytes) based on the source MIDI file.

When the lyrics are displayed, the player check the CUR file to look at the timing data, and checks it against the current playback speed of the MIDI.

When the player plays the MIDI file, it checks the CUR file to see when each individual character in the lyrics will be finished (in MIDI time). All the characters in the lyrics MUST be scrolled through to the end before the next line of lyrics is displayed. For example, a song with 10 lines and 250 characters will take 250+10=260 (including newlines) steps to scroll through. (Not including the first 4 metadata lines)

For example, if the lyrics are:

```
Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star
```
The byte sequence will be scrolled through for every character in the lyrics according to MIDI time, starting from `0000` to `FFFF`


In RustyKaraoke's implementation, characters are scrolled twice per MIDI time step for proper timing. This is a weird quirk with the encoding of the lyrics.

## Editing NCN files

There are a few tools that can be used to edit NCN files:
- eXtreme Karaoke Player - contains a component called `LyrEdit` that can be used to edit the lyrics file.
- NCN File manager can create an NCN file from a MIDI file, a lyrics file and the CUR timing data, but it cannot edit the lyrics file.


# Extra: The EMK format

the EMK format is a proprietary format used by Extreme Karaoke. It is a container format that contains the 3 NCN files (MIDI, lyrics, and CUR) and some metadata.

EMK files are XOR encrypted with a key of `AFF24C9CE9EA9943`. Which then produces a zlib compressed stream.

When extracted, the EMK file contains the header list from `0x22`-`0x2A` to `0x2A`-`0x32` (u64) is the start and end of the header list. There are various headers in the header list, and each data type has a magic value prefix that is used to identify the data type.

The header type prefixes are as follows:

- `0x02` - A single byte, the next byte is the data
- `0x03` - A "short" (16-bit) integer, the next 2 bytes are the data
- `0x04` - A regular (32-bit) integer, the next 4 bytes are the data
- `0x06` - A string, the next byte is the length of the string, and the next N bytes are the string data.


Next are the actual headers. Headers are a collection of data that are stored inside the header list. The header data is in the following order:

- Tag - A string that identifies the header.
  There are 4 known types of headers:
    - `HEADER` - EMK metadata, contains the version and signature of the file.
    - `SONG_INFO` - Song metadata, contains various information about the song.
    - `MIDI_DATA` - MIDI data, contains the MIDI file.
    - `LYRIC_DATA` - Lyrics data, contains the lyrics file.
    - `CUR_DATA` - CUR data, contains the standard NCN CUR file.
- Uncompressed size - The size of the data when uncompressed.
- Start of compressed data - The offset to the start of the compressed data in the decoded EMK file.
- End of compressed data - The offset to the end of the compressed data in the decoded EMK file.
- Unknown - Unknown data, usually 0x01.
- Unknown - Unknown data, usually 0x00.
- MD5 hash - 16-bit MD5 hash of the data.
- Unknown - Unknown data, Usually contains an empty string.
- Unknown - Unknown data, usually 0x00.

More data is needed to fully understand the unknown data fields in the header.

The header ends when another header tag is found. The header list ends when the offset of the header list is reached.

To get the data from the header, get the start and end of the compressed data offsets, and then decompress the data using those offsets using zlib.

The output will be a normal NCN file, with some extra metadata
